Tool Kit on Prevention of Sexual Assault Released

By MarEx 2017-12-05 20:53:24

The Ship Operations Cooperative Program (SOCP) has released brochures and posters on prevention of sexual assault, sexual harassment, retaliation, bystander intervention, bullying, hazing, coercion, stalking, and other prohibited behaviors in the U.S. Merchant Marine. 

These “tool kit” items are designed to provide guidance and a practical approach for different audiences within the maritime industry. 

“The U.S. Merchant Marine aggressively promotes a culture where sexual assault, sexual harassment and other prohibited behaviors cannot exist,” said Patricia Finsterbusch, President, SOCP. “SOCP suggests the widest distribution of these tool kit items to the industry. We strongly recommend that SOCP members and the maritime industry continue the dialogue and spread the word about the importance of these issues.” 

SOCP Members developed these brochures and posters under a cooperative agreement with the Maritime Administration (MARAD) to address issues affecting the shipboard climate in the U.S. maritime industry. 

The tool kit contains four quick reference guide brochures targeted to support the company, master, shoreside personnel and victims. Zero tolerance techniques and tips for prevention of and response to sexual assault and sexual harrassmentbehaviors are provided as appropriate for the different intended audiences.

There are also 17 downloadable Prevention posters, which include some of the following themes: All Reports Investigated, Responsibility, Safety on Shore Leave, Zero Tolerance Culture, Negative Effects, and more. SOCP encourages companies to post these on board their vessels as well as in shoreside facilities.

In addition to the previously released Computer Based Training and Best Practices Guide, the brochures and posters are available at no cost and may be downloaded by visiting the SOCP website at http://www.socp.us/article.html?aid=211. SOCP encourages organizations to share this link on their websites for maximum exposure and distribution.

SOCP is a non-profit organization of maritime industry professionals working together to improve the safety, productivity, efficiency, security and environmental performance of U.S. vessel operations. SOCP collaborated with its members, which include U.S. shipowners and operators, maritime unions, academies, training institutions, government agencies, and others, to solicit recommendations on the content of the best practices for the U.S. Merchant Marine industry. 