Princess Cruises to Name Next Ship Sky Princess

By MarEx 2017-11-30 19:28:28

Princess Cruises has announced its fourth Royal-class ship will be named Sky Princess. Sister ship to Royal Princess, Regal Princess and Majestic Princess, Sky Princess is scheduled to debut in October 2019 on a series of Mediterranean voyages.
 
The 143,700 ton, 3,660-passenger vessel will feature an evolution of the successful design platform used for previous Royal-class ships. 

"Sky Princess continues a Princess Cruises legacy and honors one of our previous ships," said Jan Swartz, group president of Princess Cruises and Carnival Australia. "When Princess merged with Sitmar Cruises in 1988, Sky Princess joined our fleet and sailed with us for 12 years. Now more than 30 years later, a new Sky Princess will join the fleet featuring our modern design platform and contemporary innovations offered to exceed our guests' expectations."
 
The inaugural Mediterranean deployment of Sky Princess features 10 cruise departures on eight unique itineraries. First is a seven-day Mediterranean & Adriatic cruise from Athens (Piraeus) to Barcelona departing on October 20, 2019. This voyage is combinable with a seven-day Mediterranean Barcelona to Rome (Civitavecchia) voyage for a 14-day Inaugural Western Mediterranean & Adriatic Medley from Athens to Rome.
 
In addition, Sky Princess will sail on a new seven-day Mediterranean round trip Rome voyage, combinable with a seven-day Mediterranean Barcelona to Rome for a 14-day Western Mediterranean Medley voyage calling in some of the most iconic ports in the Mediterranean Sea.
 
The culmination of Sky Princess' inaugural Mediterranean season will be a 14-day Spanish Passage from Barcelona to Ft. Lauderdale, combinable with the seven-day Mediterranean and/or the seven-day Mediterranean roundtrip Rome voyages for a 21-day or 28-day Grand Adventure across the Mediterranean Sea and Atlantic Ocean.
 
A fifth Royal-class vessel is also currently under construction at Fincantieri and will debut in 2020.

