Oceanwide Expeditions Expands Antarctic Exploration Options

By MarEx 2017-11-30 18:16:24

Oceanwide Expeditions' new Polar Class 6 ship Hondius, being built by Brodosplit, Croatia, will offer deluxe accommodation for 176 passengers sailing both the Arctic and the Antarctic.

The vessel will be 107 meters (350 feet) long, with a breadth of 17.6 meters (58 feet). She will be equipped with two main engines for a total of 4,200 kW, generating a speed of 15 knots.

The propulsion system consists of two medium speed main engines and one adjustable pitch propeller. The flexible power management (in combination with a shaft generator instead of a diesel-driven generator) reduces fuel consumption and CO2 emissions. 

Further environmental features include the use of biodegradable lubrication oils; certifiably hazardous-free coating and paint of the vessel; the use of steam for onboard heating; minimal use of electrical heating (for less fuel consumption); LED interior and exterior lighting (reducing power and fuel needs); and waste heat, such as cooling water for the main engines, reused for the production of fresh water.    

A speedy zodiac embarkation is guaranteed, with two separate gangways and an indoor platform that can be used for outdoor activities such as kayaking. While Hondius is at anchor during passenger excursions, she will be able to drift or remain in position with the support of the bow and stern thrusters.  

One deck on board is reserved for an observation lounge, with a separate lecture room in order to offer simultaneous or multilingual lectures and presentations.

Over the years, Oceanwide Expeditions has developed a variety of outdoor activities and offers a dedicated Basecamp program that highlights activities such as camping, kayaking, shore excursions including snowshoeing, mountaineering, zodiac cruises, scuba diving and a photography workshop. 

Oceanwide offers shore-based excursion programs and special exploratory voyages, ship-based helicopter trips to the Ross Sea and the Emperor Penguins in the Weddell Sea, ski and sail programs in Spitsbergen and Greenland, and expeditions to the world’s most remote locations, such as Peter I Island and Bouvet Island.

Currently, Oceanwide Expeditions' Antarctic voyages include Ross Sea voyages on Ortelius. The vessel visits the Antarctic Peninsula, Peter I Island, Macquarie Island, Campbell Island (for southern royal albatrosses) and the Ross Sea itself. Tours include visits to the historic huts of Shackleton and Scott on Ross Island, as well as McMurdo Station and the Dry Valleys. 

Hondius

Registered: The Netherlands
Length: 107.6 meters
Breadth: 17.6 meters
Draft: 5.30 meters
Displacement: 5,590 tons
Propulsion: 2 x ABC main engines;
total 4,200 kW
Speed: 15 knots
Passengers: 176 in 83 cabins
Staff & crew: 72

