Azamara's New Pursuit

By MarEx 2017-11-30 18:53:11

Azamara Club Cruises, the upmarket subsidiary of Royal Carribbean Cruises, recently announced their expansion with Azamara Pursuit – a sister ship to Azamara Journey and Azamara Quest that will be delivered in March 2018.

“We are pleased to expand our portfolio by 50 percent, allowing us to visit even more regions of the world through the acquisition of this sister ship,” said Larry Pimentel, President and CEO of Azamara Club Cruises. Together, the three ships will offer guests the opportunity to visit seven continents and 217 ports from August 28, 2018 to April 5, 2019.

The 30,277 gross ton vessel will offer accommodation for 694 guests. She is comparable in size to the Azamara Journey and Azamara Quest and will allow visits to unique ports that larger ships are unable to reach. Together, the three ships will support the brand’s commitment to enrich destination immersion around the world, by staying longer in port to allow guests to experience more, says Pimentel.

The ship’s décor will match the brand’s upmarket position and be similar to the renovations recently introduced on the Azamara Journey and Azamara Quest.

The ship will visit 61 destinations, including 15 maiden calls:

Agadir, Morocco
Antofagosta, Chile
Chilean Fjords
Cruising Beagle Channel
Fowey, United Kingdom
Laguna San Rafael, Chile
Lima (Callao), Peru
Maceió, Brazil
Monemvasia, Greece
Pisco (San Martin), Peru
Salvaverry (Trujillo), Peru
Samos, Greece
San Antonio, Chile
Seyðisfjörður, Iceland
Spetses, Greece

South America Featured Experiences

Travelers sailing through South America will dock in marquee destinations such as Buenos Aires and Rio de Janeiro, while also traversing through scenic channels such as the Fjords of Chile and Ushuaia, Argentina, the furthest south deep-water port. Guests can also expect holiday stops in Rio de Janeiro for New Year's Eve 2018 and for Carnaval in 2019. Like all Azamara voyages, the South American voyages will fully immerse guests in the most photo-worthy experiences, including stargazing in Atacama Desert (Antofagasta, Chile).

Europe Featured Experiences

Azamara continues to enhance their authentic Europe experiences by adding additional ports that bigger ships can not visit, offering for example, an elevator ride into the magma chamber of dormant volcano in Iceland, Thrihnukagigur - once filled with hot lava. The Three Peaks Crater erupted 4,000 years ago and is truly a unique natural phenomenon. In Nauplion, Greece, guests can visit the Monastery of St. John (Prodromos), built on the side of a rock face around 1167. 

