Ports of Auckland Sets Zero Emissions Goal

BY MAREX 2018-01-11 10:52:54

Ports of Auckland plans to be a zero emissions port by 2040. 

As a first step, taken in December, the port's emissions were accurately measured. The port partnered with Enviro-Mark Solutions and is using the Certified Emissions Measurement and Reduction Scheme (CEMARS) to measure and manage greenhouse gas emissions. Auckland is now the first port in New Zealand to become a CEMARS certified organization.

The port has measured the direct and indirect emissions, including those of its subsidiaries and including diesel and electricity usage and air travel. It has not yet measured emissions produced by third parties over which it has no control, for example the ships, trucks and trains which come to the port. These will be included at a later stage.

In the 2017 financial year, the port generated 16,208.47 tonnes of CO2 equivalent (tCO2e). To reduce that, an Emissions Management & Reduction Plan has been produced which sets out the projects and interim targets that will enable the delivery of the long term goal of a zero emissions port by 2040.

Ports of Auckland CEO Tony Gibson said "This is a big step for us. It is easy to set goals, but another thing to actually start delivering. We are now in a position to deliver. We know the scale of the challenge and we have a clear plan and achievable milestones to tackle it."

Shore Power

In December, the port released the results of its study into the feasibility of using shore power for cruise ships berthed in Auckland. Cruise ships were selected for the study as the cruise industry has been proactive at addressing environmental issues over the past decade and these vessels are more frequently fitted with the on-board infrastructure required. This, combined with high individual electricity demand while at berth (compared to other vessel types), is expected to increase utilization and deliver the highest emission reduction return.

The study looked at the feasibility of a wide range of emission reduction technologies, including:

•   Shore Power (grid supplied, local generation including renewables, hybrid),
•   Fuel switching (methanol, LNG, Low Sulfur Diesel),
•   Land/barge based exhaust capture systems and
•   Ship based scrubbers.

Viable solutions were assessed against a range of social and environmental attributes in addition to whole of life cost. This holistic approach was adopted to provide a balanced assessment of the alternatives, with consideration of the stakeholder values. In New Zealand, over 80 percent of electricity is generated renewably.

The report recommended two options:

Plan to implement shore power at one cruise berth in the next five years; and/or
Fuel Switching to 0.1 percent sulfur fuel

"POAL has decided adopt the recommendation to plan for shore power. Shore power has an estimated total cost of NZ$18.3 million ($13 million) (±30 percent) and the potential to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 31 percent," said Gibson. "We will not pursue fuel switching at this stage because the greenhouse gas reductions it delivers are marginal. While fuel switching would deliver a large reduction in sulfur emissions, this reduction is due to happen with the introduction of new international rules on the sulfur content of marine fuels in 2020." 

A detailed cost estimate and investigation of funding options will be undertaken this year.

