Kirby’s Matt Woodruff Elected President of American Maritime Partnership

January 11, 2018 by gCaptain

The American Maritime Partnership (AMP), the member-driven coalition representing the U.S. domestic maritime industry on policy issues, has announced that Matt Woodruff of Kirby Corporation has been elected as its new President, succeeding Thomas A. Allegretti of The American Waterways Operators.

In addition to his role with at the AMP, Woodruff is Vice President of Public and Government Affairs for Kirby Corporation and serves as the Southern Region Chairman of the American Waterways Operators and Vice Chairman of the Inland Waterways Users Board. He is a retired Commander for the U.S. Naval Reserve, where he served as an intelligence officer.

Allegretti had served as President si\nce he was elected in 2013. 

Joining Woodruff in elected leadership positions on the AMP Board of Directors are Michael Roberts of Crowley Maritime Corp., James (Jim) Weakley of Lake Carriers’ Association, and Matthew Paxton of Shipbuilders Council of America (SCA).

Roberts was elected AMP Vice President, continuing his service on the Board of Directors since the organization was founded, including several years as Treasurer. Roberts is also Senior Vice President and General Counsel of Crowley.

Weakley will serve as Treasurer for the AMP Board of Directors. He has been an AMP Board Member since 2003 and is the President of Lake Carriers’ Association, a position he has also held since 2003.

Paxton, as elected Secretary, continues his role on the AMP Board of Directors having participated as a Board Member since 2006. He also serves as the President of the Shipbuilders Council of America and is a partner at Adams and Reese LLP.

“Leading the American Maritime Partnership – which speaks for the half a million American men and women whose employment depends on the domestic maritime industry – is a great honor. Our vibrant domestic maritime industry is an essential foundation for America’s economic, national, and homeland security,” said Mr. Woodruff. “I look forward to working with my colleagues to further strengthen and support the industry’s essential work of meeting America’s domestic maritime transportation needs with American vessels and seafarers.”

The American Maritime Partnership’s 450-plus members span the United States and its territories and include a diverse membership of vessel owners and operators, shipbuilders and repair yards, dredging and marine construction contractors, trade associations, and pro-defense groups. The group represents members on issues related to supporting the domestic maritime industry and maintaining the Jones Act as the basis of the United States’ domestic maritime policy.

