Boko Haram Video Is Said to Show Captured Girls From Chibok

By DIONNE SEARCEY JAN. 15, 2018

DAKAR, Senegal — A video released in Nigeria on Monday by Boko Haram purports to show girls among those abducted in 2014 from a school in the town of Chibok vowing to stay with their captors and never go home.

About a dozen girls, some with faces covered, appear in the video, one of several released in recent days by Boko Haram, the Islamist group terrorizing northern Nigeria in a war that has spilled across borders and raged for nearly nine years.

“We are the Chibok girls,” one of the girls said in the video, according to translations by new agencies. “We are the ones you are crying about for us to come back. By the grace of God we are never coming back.”

It was unclear if the girls in the video were in fact among the nearly 300 who in April 2014 were kidnapped by fighters from their school in northeastern Nigeria as they were preparing for exams. Allen Manasa, a spokesman for the village of Chibok, said he could not verify the identities of anyone in the video. The girls’ families have not yet seen the video, he said.

It was impossible to tell from the video if the girls’ message had been coerced. Many female captives of Boko Haram have been forced into being sex slaves and suicide bombers. Thousands of people have been kidnapped by Boko Haram fighters, who are known to ransack villages and kill men and boys who refuse to join their ranks, conscripting others into the fight.

In an image from a video released by Boko Haram, a leader of the extremist group, Abubakar Shekau, said the abducted Chibok girls had “recognized God’s religion.”
During their time in captivity, the girls from Chibok have been used by militants as examples, according to other women held as captives. They are fed well and shown off to would-be conscripts to demonstrate how they will receive better treatment if they follow Boko Haram’s orders.

The video released on Monday shows about a dozen girls, some with small children.

“These people are taking care of us and we are grateful to them,” said one girl in the video, according to a Reuters translation. “We are happy here — we have found our faith.” A veil covered the girl’s face.

Abubakar Shekau, the leader of a key Boko Haram faction, also appeared in the video footage, which was published on the news site SaharaReporters.com by Ahmad Salkida, a journalist who specializes in covering the conflict. “The Chibok girls have adopted and recognized God’s religion,” Mr. Shekau said.

“We captured the Chibok girls while they were being taught Western education,” he said. “They realized that Western education, its rules and regulations that you taught them, is bad.”

Boko Haram, which translates as “Western education is forbidden,” has criticized secular education since the early years of the movement, which has also incorporated a harsh interpretation of Islam as well as public anxieties and outrage at government corruption and societal inequality in northern Nigeria. The group has attacked numerous schools and last year sent a string of suicide bombers to the gates of the University of Maiduguri, in the city that gave rise to Boko Haram.

Earlier this month, the Nigerian military rescued one of girls from Chibok, Salomi Pogu, along with a 14-year-old girl who was with a child. She and several other girls have been rescued during military operations, and dozens of other girls have been released after negotiations with militants. Several of the girls have died while being held, and about 100 others remain missing.

In Monday’s video, Mr. Shekau also claimed responsibility for having downed a Nigerian helicopter. The military had said it had crashed because of technical problems. Video footage also showed images of women said to be police officers kidnapped last year. Those claims could not be verified.

