1,000 Danes Accused of Child Pornography for Sharing Video of Teens

By MARTIN SELSOE SORENSEN JAN. 15, 2018

COPENHAGEN — About 1,000 adults and adolescents may face prosecution for sharing online video of two 15-year-olds having sex, and more people may be charged for spreading the images, the Danish National Police said Monday.

Consensual sex between 15-year-olds is legal in Denmark, but anyone who forwarded the video violated the law against distributing child pornography, the police explained. The two video clips — one 50 seconds long, the other 9 seconds — were shared through Facebook’s Messenger app.

The case prompted outrage when it was first reported last year, because the video appeared to show the girl being abused, penetrated with foreign objects. The girl has said that she consented to sex, but not to the abuse or to the recording.

The police notified 1,004 people on Monday that they faced preliminary charges, which the police can issue on their own; prosecutors will decide whether to proceed with charges and take the cases to trial. Investigators are looking into whether the video was distributed on platforms other than Facebook.

“It may sound very dramatic that we’re charging with child pornography,” said Flemming Kjaerside, a police superintendent. “Many had no intention to distribute child pornography, but objectively speaking, that’s what they’ve done.”

With the ubiquity of phone cameras, cases like this one have become a recurring phenomenon around the world, testing accepted legal standards. In some instances, including a highly publicized case in North Carolina, minors have faced criminal charges for sending explicit pictures of themselves. In others, like a Colorado case involving more than 100 high school students, the authorities have declined to bring any charges.

Those found guilty in the Danish case are unlikely to go to prison, but the convictions will remain on their records for 10 years, barring them from becoming police officers and from taking certain jobs working with children. Some have already confessed, Mr. Kjaerside said, as the police across the country contacted the accused and their parents, and conducted the first rounds of questioning.

It is not clear whether all of the people charged knew that the boy and girl in the videos were under 18, the minimum age for legally distributed pornography. If they convince a judge that they had no way of knowing, the child pornography charges could be dropped, but they could still be charged with distributing the material without the consent of the couple in the images.

All but eight of the accused are under 25 years old, and four-fifths of them are male. A few 14-year-olds who also shared the video are not being prosecuted, the police said.

Mira Bech, 19, who received notice to contact the police for questioning, admitted seeing and storing the video, but she denied sharing it. She said she knew others who also had the video but had not been charged.

“This will ruin my life,” she told TV2, a national television station. “It’s the world’s most ridiculous case. I couldn’t tell that the people in the video were under 18.”

Mr. Kjaerside, the police superintendent, said that charges were leveled only against those who had shared the video.

The case came to light in the fall of 2017, after Facebook alerted the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children in the United States, and that group contacted American and international authorities. Danish police spent months identifying the social media users, their IP addresses, phone numbers and names.

The recordings were made at a party by friends of the couple, who were the first to share them online. Two of them were fined last year for their part in the distribution.

The girl in the video later told Information, a Danish newspaper, that one of the people responsible tried to use the recordings to blackmail her. She said she received a message saying: “I have a video of you. If you don’t send me a nude photo, I’ll share it with all of my friends.”

“I tried to forget that evening,” she said. “I knew that it was filmed, but I didn’t realize they would think of passing the videos on to others.”

Kuno Sorensen, a psychologist with Save the Children Denmark, said, “Youngsters are afraid of reporting these cases to the police,” and they are embarrassed to discuss them with their parents or other authority figures.

“A lot of the charged are under 18 years,” he said. “It’s sad that they become hostages in this, but at the same time they’ve committed a crime with a heavy impact on the victims.”

For years, Danes have discussed the issue of sexual images shared without consent, so it is hard to believe that the people who spread the video were ignorant of the consequences, said Emma Holten, who is known for her campaign against cyberbullying.

“Four years ago, I would have felt sorry for them,” she said. “Back then you could have argued that they were not aware of that it was illegal, but today they know.”

Rather than tell children not to take explicit images, she said, adults should tell them not to bully or humiliate others, just as they do in school or on playgrounds.

“Telling them to not take photos is like trying to forbid them to have sex,” she said. “That’s been tried for 10,000 years and it didn’t work.”



