U.S. Cruise Ship Escapes Fire From Pirates in Gulf of Aden

By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS DEC. 2, 2008

NAIROBI, Kenya (AP) — Pirates chased and shot at an American cruise ship with more than 1,000 people on board but failed to hijack the vessel as it sailed along a corridor patrolled by international warships, officials said Tuesday.

The captain of the cruise ship, the M/S Nautica, ordered passengers inside and gunned the engine, enabling the ship to outrun the pirates’ speedboats in the Gulf of Aden on Sunday, a company spokesman said.

“It is very fortunate that the liner managed to escape,” said Noel Choong, who heads the International Maritime Bureau’s Piracy Reporting Center in Malaysia. He urged ships in the area to remain vigilant.

In a statement on its Web site, Oceania Cruises Inc., based in Miami, said that pirates had fired eight rifle shots at the liner but that the ship’s captain increased speed and managed to outrun them.

“When the pirates were sighted, the captain went on the public address system and asked passengers to remain in the interior spaces of the ship and wait until he gave further instructions,” said Tim Rubacky, a spokesman for Oceania. “Within five minutes, it was over.”

Mr. Choong said the ship was carrying 656 passengers and 399 crew members. No one was injured and there was no damage to the vessel, Oceania said.

Also on Tuesday, the United Nations Security Council extended for another year its authorization for countries to enter Somalia’s territorial waters with advance notice and use “all necessary means” to stop piracy and armed robbery at sea.

The Nautica was on a 32-day cruise from Rome to Singapore, with stops in Italy, Egypt, Oman, the United Arab Emirates, India, Malaysia and Thailand, the Web site said. Based on that schedule, the liner was headed from Egypt to Oman when it was attacked.

The United States Navy’s Fifth Fleet, based in Bahrain, said that it was aware of the failed hijacking of the cruise ship but that it had no further details.

International warships patrol the area and have created a security corridor in the region under an American-led initiative, but attacks on shipping have not abated. This year, there have been more than 100 attacks on ships off the coast of Somalia, resulting in the hijacking of 40 vessels, said Mr. Choong, of the Piracy Reporting Center. Fourteen vessels and more than 250 crew members remain in the hands of pirates.

In two of the most daring attacks, pirates seized a Ukrainian freighter loaded with 33 battle tanks in September, and a Saudi oil tanker carrying $100 million worth of crude oil in November.

On Tuesday, a Somali pirate spokesman said his group would release the Ukrainian ship within two days.

The spokesman, Sugule Ali, told The Associated Press by satellite phone on Tuesday that a ransom agreement had been reached, but he would not give details. The pirates had originally asked for $20 million when they hijacked the freighter, the Faina.

“Once we receive this payment, we will also make sure that all our colleagues on ship reach land safely; then the release will take place,” Mr. Sugule said. He said he was not afraid of intervention by warships.

“We know that the quantity of the equipment on the ship and the valuable lives we held hostage will help us remain on board and get ransom,” he said.