German Navy Thwarts Pirate Attack

By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS DEC. 25, 2008

CAIRO (AP) — A German military helicopter chased away pirates who were trying to board an Egyptian ship on Thursday off the coast of Somalia. One of the ship’s crew members was shot in the attack.

The ship, a bulk carrier with 31 crew members, was passing through the Gulf of Aden on its way to Asia when gun-toting pirates in a speedboat began pursuing it, said Noel Choong of the International Maritime Bureau’s piracy reporting center.

A passing ship alerted the bureau, based in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, which asked a multinational naval coalition force in the area to help, Mr. Choong said.

In response, the German Navy frigate Karlsruhe sent a helicopter, a military spokesman said, speaking on condition of anonymity in accord with military policy.

The pirates fled as the helicopter reached the Egyptian ship, according to a statement from the German military, but not before shooting and wounding one of the ship’s crew members.

Continue reading the main story
A second helicopter, carrying a medical team, retrieved the injured crew member, who is now receiving treatment on the Karlsruhe, the statement said.

After the attack, the Egyptian ship, the Wadi al-Arab, continued on its way to South Korea, where it was delivering a shipment of wheat from Ukraine, said Deputy Foreign Minister Ahmed Rizq of Egypt.

More than a dozen warships are now patrolling the vast Gulf of Aden, one of the world’s busiest sea lanes, to try to thwart Somali pirates, who have made an estimated $30 million in ransoms from hijacking ships this year.

Britain, India, Iran, the United States, France and Germany are among the countries with naval forces in the waters or on their way there.

China said last week that it would also send naval ships to the gulf, and on Friday three Chinese warships — two destroyers and a supply ship — were scheduled to sail from a base on the southern island province of Hainan. The fleet will include 70 special operations forces and about 800 crew members altogether, the official news agency Xinhua reported.