130 Are Said to Die in Pirate Attack on Vietnamese Refugees

BY NYTIMES May 7, 1989

KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia, May 6— About 130 Vietnamese refugees were massacred or left to drown last month by pirates who attacked their boat off the Malaysian coast, refugee officials said on Friday, citing the account of the only refugee known to have survived the ordeal.

The attackers, armed with shotguns and hammers, shot and bludgeoned refugees to death after raping several of the women aboard, said the office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in Kuala Lumpur.

The seven pirates then set the refugee boat ablaze, the office said. Other refugees died of exhaustion after floating in the sea clinging to dead bodies of fellow refugees, an official of the High Commissioner's office said.

''It is one of the worst incidents of piracy we have heard of,'' said the official, Jean-Marie Fakhouri. Increase in Such Attacks

The attack took place in the South China Sea off Malaysia on April 16, according to the only known survivor, who was picked up by another refugee boat after he floated for 29 hours.

Such attacks on refugees fleeing Vietnam have increased in number and viciousness recently. Two attacks in March left more than 100 people missing and presumed dead. The attacks are occurring as countries in the region, beset by growing numbers of Vietnamese refugees, are taking new measures to stem the influx.

Western officials say most pirates are Thais who roam the South China Sea, the Gulf of Thailand and waters near Indonesia. The 22-year-old man who survived the attack in April was identified as Pham Ngoc Minh Hung. 'Plunged Into the Sea'

He fled Vietnam on April 14 on a motorized boat with about 130 refugees, including 20 children, said a statement from the commissioner's office.

Pirates from two boats boarded the refugee boat, shot and killed the vessel's 2 pilots and its mechanic and raped some, if not all, of the 15 to 20 women and girls as young as 12 years old, the statement said.

Then the pirates set the boat ablaze. ''In the ensuing panic, many refugees grabbed buoys and jerrycans and floats and plunged into the sea.'' The pirates ''used sticks to prevent refugees from clinging on floating objects. Those who resisted were shot at.''