Iran Takes Credit for Thwarting Pirate Attack on U.S.-Flagged Vessel

BY J. DAVID GOODMAN  MAY 24, 2012 1:42 PM

Who scared the pirates away from a United States-flagged cargo ship in the Gulf of Oman on Wednesday — armed guards or an Iranian warship?

The Danish company that operates the ship, the Maersk Line, said its onboard guards repelled an attack from multiple pirate skiffs after the attackers opened fire on the vessel, the Maersk Texas. “Despite clear warning signals, the skiffs continued their direct line toward Maersk Texas and the embarked security team fired warning shots,” the company told the maritime news site gCaptain. “The pirates then fired upon Maersk Texas, and the security team returned fire per established U.S. Coast Guard rules of engagement.”

But Iranian state media had a different interpretation of events on Thursday, crediting the safety of ship to a nearby Iranian naval warship. “An Iranian naval ship was patrolling the area when it received an S O S from the American cargo ship,” read a report on IRNA, the state-run news agency, that quoted Iran’s naval authorities. “Upon arrival of Iranian forces the pirates who had attacked the American ships aboard some speed boats had to flee the scene.”

Lt. Cmdr. Mark Hankey, a spokesman for Combined Task Force 151, an international counterpiracy team off the coast of Africa, was unable to confirm Iran’s role in the episode, though he said such behavior would not be surprising. “If the Iranians responded to a mayday call, then that’s perfectly normal activity,” he told The Associated Press. But, he added, the nature of the episode was not certain. “It is not clear from the information available to date whether this was a piracy event,” he said.

The Maersk statement observed that nearby fishing vessels and other small craft were unharmed in the firefight, as was the crew and guards aboard the vessel; the fate of the pirate attackers was unclear. The initial statement did not mention the role claimed for the Iranian naval ship, nor did initial wire reports from The A.P. and Reuters.

A company spokesman later told Agence France-Presse that the ship had heard from the Iranian Navy by radio but “received no assistance from the Iranian navy.”

Three years ago, Navy Seals rescued the captain of another of the company’s ships, the Maersk Alabama, in an operation that killed three Somali pirates.

The savior role claimed for Iranian forces came from Iran’s naval press office, according to the IRNA report. Such braggadocio appeared to echo a string of reports by the United States Navy this year when three Iranian vessels — one hijacked by Somali pirates and two others in distress — were assisted by American warships. Those episodes came during heightened tensions over the United States military presence in the Persian Gulf and were promoted by the United States Navy, with news releases that included images and video.

The Iranian account of the pirate attack coincided on Thursday with a second day of tense negotiations with world powers in Baghdad over Iran’s nuclear program.

No mention is made by the Iranian news agency of guards aboard the ship.

Apart from the disagreement over how the attack was prevented, the role of private guards in defending ships against hijacking the pirate-infested waters near the Horn of Africa has come under scrutiny in recent weeks after dramatic video surfaced of a violent encounter between guards and pirates.

Recorded last year, the video showed guards raining bullets down on an small craft on the side of a large ship and was posted to the video sharing site Live Leak in April:

The pirate vessel can be seen crashing into the side of the ship during the gunfire, and the president of the private security firm guarding the ship told Bloomberg Business Week that some of the boats’ occupants were probably killed or injured. The video has generated debate in shipping circles over whether the forceful response to suspected pirates was warranted.